# LIS 4235 - Scripting for Large Databases (4 Credit Hours)

Spring 2023

**Instructor:** Peter Organisciak, Assistant Professor


## Course Description

Scripting for Large Databases is a bridge between structured data storage and data analysis. It will equip students to learn more from databases in aggregate, building foundational data science skills in the process. This course will introduce students to the basics of data
storage and acquisition as part of a multi-step data gathering,
processing, analysis, and visualization effort. The logic and structure
of relational databases will be reviewed as well as non-relational
(NoSQL) alternatives. Techniques and methods for automation and scalable
data processing will be introduced using the Python programming
language, with a focus on the SciPy Stack of data science libraries.
Additionally, big data workflows will be covered. Skills will be
integrated and applied by the student through the use of prepared data
sources, along with use of APIs and web scraping techniques to acquire
data through internet sources.

## Learning Outcomes

Upon satisfactory completion of the course, students will be able to:

1.  Demonstrate knowledge of relational database fundamentals.

2.  Use SQL and Pandas for structured data querying and analysis.

3.  Understand the contexts of use for NoSQL, and apply them
    with MongoDB.

4.  Apply fundamental data mining concepts in information
    science contexts.

5.  Collect and organize data from the web.

6.  Understand aggregations and transformations for structured and
    semi-structured data.

7.  Understand and apply large data patterns, such as Map-Reduce
    and Split-Apply-Combine.

## Schedule Overview

- Week 1    Relational Databases, Data types, Introduction to the SciPy Stack
- Week 2    Relational Databases continued, Data collection, Jupyter and Python
- Week 3    SQLite, Basic Querying, Introduction to Pandas
- Week 4    Split-Apply-Combine, Deletions and Updates, Indexing
- Week 5    Summation, aggregation, and transformation
- Week 6    Visualization
- Week 7    Advanced techniques, review
- Week 8    Regular Expressions
- Week 9    MongoDB - Ingesting Data, document aggregations
- Week 10   Document aggregations continued; Map-Reduce

## Grading Overview

### Assignments

#### Labs – 600 pts
- 5 weekly labs and two mini-labs (+1 ungraded lab)

The labs are small exercises of specific skills and knowledge.

#### Analysis Project – 260 pts

Perform a data analysis on a dataset of interest. This assignment has
three parts: a problem statement (week 5, 40pts) an oral data collection
progress report (week 8, 20pts), both shared on Canvas with colleagues
for comment, and a final report (week 10, 200pts). In another college,
there'd be an exam for this course. However, in our LIS context, it’s
important to apply your skills with an engaging, creative problem.

#### Participation - 140 pts

Your participation grade is based on engagement (online and in class), as well as attendance. Remember that poor attendance may indirectly
affect your grade on the assignment and labs: missing class will make
this course very difficult.

*Total: 1000 pts*

### Details

#### Time Due and Late Policy

-   Assignments are due 2 hours before your section's lecture starts.

-   Late assignments will lose 5% day, up to 50%. Late is better
    than never.

-   1 lab can be late without penalty, because sometimes life gets in
    the way.

-   Last day for late assignments: March 15^th^.

#### General Notes and Accommodations

We are here for you to learn. My goal is for you to succeed, and I try
to be fair, flexible, and sensitive to the realities of student life.
Hopefully, this is reflected in the lessons, late-policy, grading,
communications, workload etc.

Various policy accommodations are available, including for:

-   observance of holy days,

-   students with disabilities or medical issues, and

-   student athlete conflicts.

The details of these accommodations are outlined more thoroughly below.
In many of these cases, it is important to let me know early if you will
need an accommodation. 

Even if it is not a stated policy, if you feel you are disadvantaged in
your learning in some way, let me know. If the course content is not
matching with certain cultural contexts, I can try to adapt it, within
reason.

This syllabus provides an overview of the course, but things may change
while it is underway. If that happens, it's in service of the learning
outcomes. Sometimes I'll see in class that we need more time on a topic,
or an event or speaker will make a topic pertinent sooner, or a new
publication will arrive and displace an old one. Sometimes, I'll realize
that there's a better way to learn something, and I'll want *you* to
benefit, not just next year's students.

If you are having problems or concerns, always feel welcome to contact
me.

#### Student Responsibilities

As a student in this course, you are expected to challenge yourself, to
actively participate in your education, and to search both inside and
outside of the classroom for answers to your questions.

It is important for students to perform their work honestly, and to
contribute toward an inclusive space.

Don't plagiarize. Empathize with your classmates, and don't antagonize
them. Speak about yourself, not others.

### Honor code

All work submitted in this course must be your own and produced
exclusively for this course. The use of sources (ideas, quotations,
paraphrases) must be properly acknowledged and documented. For the
consequences of violating the Academic Misconduct policy, refer to the
University of Denver website on the Honor Code
([*www.du.edu/honorcode*](http://www.du.edu/honorcode)). See
also [*http://www.du.edu/studentconduct*](http://www.du.edu/studentconduct) for
general information about conduct expectations from the Office of
Student Conduct.

#### Inclusive Learning Environments

In this class, we will work together to develop a learning community
that is inclusive and respectful. Our diversity may be reflected by
differences in race, culture, age, religion, sexual orientation,
socioeconomic background, and myriad other social identities and life
experiences. The goal of inclusiveness, in a diverse community,
encourages and appreciates expressions of different ideas, opinions, and
beliefs, so that conversations and interactions that could potentially
be divisive turn instead into opportunities for intellectual and
personal enrichment.

A dedication to inclusiveness requires respecting what others say, their
right to say it, and the thoughtful consideration of others’
communication. Both speaking up and listening are valuable tools for
furthering thoughtful, enlightening dialogue. Respecting one another’s
individual differences is critical in transforming a collection of
diverse individuals into an inclusive, collaborative and excellent
learning community. Our core commitment shapes our core expectation for
behavior inside and outside of the classroom.

### Class participation

Students are expected to complete reading assignments, attend all
scheduled classes, actively participate in class discussions, and submit
written assignments on due dates. Since concepts and techniques not
stressed in the textbooks will be discussed in class, attendance and
class participation are essential. You will be graded on your
contribution to class discussions and activities. The class Canvas is
for your use and convenience. It will be used to post information,
discuss issues, and aid group communication.

### COVID-19 Protocols 

University of Denver continues to use an alert level system from clear (low risk, high vaccination) to purple (severe risk). See here for details. At certain levels, mask requirements vary depending on your vaccination status.

To assist in COVID mitigation, students are not permitted to eat during classes, except where a student has an approved accommodation through the Disability Support Program (DSP). Please plan accordingly.

This course has been designed to transition to entirely online, should the need arise due to tightening local, state, or federal guidelines or campus closure. To that end, Canvas will be utilized to support this course. It is recommended that you familiarize yourself with the Canvas container for this course as soon as the term begins.

To assist in contact tracing efforts, DU faculty have been asked to keep track of close contacts in classrooms of 20 or more students. While our class is below that threshold, we will still voluntary collect seating information during class; please try to remain by the same students as you started class near. 

If you are self-quarantining/isolating, please contact Dr. Organisciak to discuss contingency plans. 

## Texts

There are no required textbooks. Readings are linked from Canvas for
each week.

## Schedule Detail

Note that the readings below are related to concepts. More instruction
and tutorial-style content will be shared on Canvas. Also, given the
technical nature of this course, I’ll be tracking the tenor of the
course really closely and may adapt the schedule in response to
perceived needs. Again, please consider Canvas as the schedule and
reading list of record.

### Week 1

*Topics*

Relational Databases, Data types, Introduction to the SciPy Stack

*Readings and Resources*

Adrienne Watt. (2014). Database Design (2nd ed.). Retrieved from
<https://opentextbc.ca/dbdesign01>. Chapters 1, 2, 4, 7.

### Week 2

*Topics*

Relational Databases continued, SQL, Data collection, Jupyter and Python

*Readings and Resources*

Semeler, A. R., Pinto, A. L., & Rozados, H. B. F. (2017). Data science
in data librarianship: Core competencies of a data librarian. Journal of
Librarianship and Information Science.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0961000617742465>

*Introduction to SQL*. (2018). Launch School. Retrieved from
<https://launchschool.com/books/sql>

-   Read the Introduction.

Hock-Chuan, Chua. (2014). MySQL by Examples for Beginners. Retrieved
from
<https://www3.ntu.edu.sg/home/ehchua/programming/sql/MySQL_Beginner.html>.

*Activities*

-   Lab: Relational Databases

### Week 3

*Topics*

SQL continued, SQL Lite, Joins, Basic Querying, Introduction to Pandas

*Readings and Resources*

*Introduction to SQL*. (2018). Launch School. Retrieved from
<https://launchschool.com/books/sql>

-   Read the section on SQL Joins.

*Activities*

-   Lab: Joins and Methods

### Week 4

*Topics*

Split-Apply-Combine, Deletions and Updates, Indexing

*Readings and Resources*

Wickham, H. (2011). The split-apply-combine strategy for data analysis.
Journal of Statistical Software, 40(1), 1–29.

Gray, J., Chaudhuri, S., Bosworth, A., Layman, A., Reichart, D.,
Venkatrao, M., … Pirahesh, H. (1997). Data Cube: A Relational
Aggregation Operator Generalizing Group-By, Cross-Tab, and Sub-Totals.
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 1(1), 29–53.
<http://www.cs.ucr.edu/~vagelis/classes/FIU-CLASSES/COP6727/publications/dataCube.pdf>

*Activities*

-   Lab: Pandas

-   Due Next Week: Problem Statement

### Week 5

*Topics*

Summation, aggregation, and transformation (SAC cont.)

*Readings and Resources*

Jake VanderPlas. (2016). Aggregations: Min, Max, and Everything In
Between. In Python Data Science Handbook. Retrieved from
<https://jakevdp.github.io/PythonDataScienceHandbook/02.04-computation-on-arrays-aggregates.html>

*Activities*

-   Lab: Split-Apply-Combine

### Week 6

*Topics*

Visualization, JSON, Semi-structured data

*Readings and Resources*

Plotting with matplotlib. (2018). Retrieved March 25, 2018, from
<http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/version/0.13/visualization.html#visualization>

Browse the visualization galleries for Matplotlib and Seaborn.

*Supplemental*

Jake VanderPlas. (2016). *Between. In Python Data Science Handbook*.
Retrieved from <https://jakevdp.github.io/PythonDataScienceHandbook/>

-   Chapter 4: Visualization with Matplotlib

*Activities*

-   Mini-lab: Visualization, Review

### Week 7

*Topics*

Advanced techniques, review

*Readings*

None!

*Activities*

- Mini-lab: Advanced Skills

- Due next week: Data Collection Progress Report

### Week 8

*Topics*

Regular Expressions

*Readings and Resources*

Daniel Jurafsky, & James H. Martin. (2016). Speech and Language
Processing (3rd ed.). Retrieved from
<https://web.stanford.edu/~jurafsky/slp3/>.

- Read Chapter 2.1, Regular Expressions

Knox, D. (2013). Understanding Regular Expressions. Programming
Historian. Retrieved from
<https://programminghistorian.org/lessons/understanding-regular-expressions>

Rubular -<http://rubular.com/>

*Activities*

- Lab: Regular Expressions

*Activities*

- Was there a colleague that was especially helpful or generous in
  helping you learn? Email Dr. O to let him know.

### Week 9

*Topics*

MongoDB - Ingesting Data, document aggregations

*Readings and Resources*

Karl Seguin. (2011). *The Little MongoDB Book* (2.6).
<http://openmymind.net/mongodb.pdf>

-   Read Introduction, Getting Started, and Ch. 1, The Basics

*Activities*

-   You have a breather! Use the time to work on your final project.


### Week 10

*Topics*

Document aggregations continued; Map-Reduce

*Readings and Resources*

Aggregation Pipeline. (2018). Retrieved March 25, 2018, from
<https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/core/aggregation-pipeline>

Dean, J., & Ghemawat, S. (2008). MapReduce: Simplified Data Processing
on Large Clusters. Communications of the ACM, 51(1), 107–113.
<http://users.cis.fiu.edu/~mrobi002/teaching/GoogleMapreduce-osdi04.pdf>.

*Supplemental Reading*

Kaushik Sathupadi. (2010). Map Reduce - A really simple introduction.
Blog Post. Retrieved from
<http://ksat.me/map-reduce-a-really-simple-introduction-kloudo/>.

*Activities*

- There's an ungraded lab to practice aggregations - let's work on it together!
- Due Next Week: Analysis Paper



## Policy Details

### Students with Disabilities/Medical Issues

If you qualify for academic accommodations because of a disability or
medical issue please submit a Faculty Letter to me from Disability
Services Program (DSP) in a timely manner so that your needs may be
addressed. DSP is located on the 4th floor of Ruffatto Hall; 1999 E.
Evans Ave.303.871. / 2372 / 2278/ 7432. Information is also available on
line
at [http://www.du.edu/disability/dsp.](http://www.du.edu/disability/dsp)

### Religious Accommodations Policy

University policy grants students excused absences from class or other
organized activities or observance of religious holy days, unless the
accommodation would create an undue hardship.  Faculty are asked to be
responsive to requests when students contact them IN ADVANCE to request
such an excused absence. Students are responsible for completing
assignments given during their absence but should be given an
opportunity to make up work missed because of religious observance.

Once a student has registered for a class, the student is expected to
examine the course syllabus for potential conflicts with holy days and
to notify the instructor by the end of the first week of classes of any
conflicts that may require an absence (including any required additional
preparation/travel time). The student is also expected to remind the
faculty member in advance of the missed class, and to make arrangements
in advance (with the faculty member) to make up any missed work or
in-class material within a reasonable amount of time.

### Student Athletes

If you are a student-athlete, you should inform me of any class days to
be missed due to DU sponsored varsity athletic events in which you are
participating. Please provide me with an absence policy form by the end
of the first week of class. You will need to make up any missed
lectures, assignments, and/or exams.

### Mental Health & Wellness

As part of the University’s Culture of Care & Support we provide campus
resources to create access for you to maintain your safety, health, and
well-being. We understand that as a student you may experience a range
of issues that can cause barriers to learning, such as strained
relationships, increased anxiety, alcohol/drug concerns depression,
difficulty concentrating and/or lack of motivation. These stressful
moments can impact academic performance or reduce your ability to
engage. The University offers services to assist you with addressing
these or ANY other concerns you may be experiencing. If you or someone
you know are suffering from any challenges, you should reach out for
support. You can seek confidential mental health services available on
campus in the Health & Counseling Center (HCC). Another helpful resource
is Student Outreach & Support (SOS), where staff work with you to
connect to all the appropriate campus resources (there are many!),
develop a plan of action, and guide you in navigating challenging
situations. If you are concerned about one of your peers you can submit
a report through our Pioneers Care System. More information about HCC,
SOS, and Pioneers CARE can be found at:

Health & Counseling Services
(<http://www.du.edu/health-and-counseling-center/>)

Student Outreach & Support and Pioneers Care
reporting <http://www.du.edu/studentlife/studentsupport/>
